---
title: "Women in Macbeth"
---

According to Juliet Dusinberre, “women parry powerlessness by becoming adept plotters, channelling into premeditation the energy which men expend in performance.”1 So, like both Portia and Calpurnia in Julius Caesar, Lady Macbeth is considered to be powerless in the world of politics, but it can be argued that she takes active steps to ensure that she is the one in control regardless of the perceived social position of her gender. This returns us to the earlier question in the first post of this series:  how do we define dominance? Lady Macbeth has 259 lines in Macbeth while the eponymous protagonist has a healthy 715, but it is still possible to argue that Lady Macbeth is the dominant half of this power couple.

Levin (2002) states that Lady Macbeth “would have been considered a witch according to the Witchcraft Statute of 1604”2 due to her invocation of evil spirits, and in some ways this title is rather fitting. Levin states that “many feminist historians and literary critics celebrate the witch as the nonconforming figure who threatened hegemonic sex/gender systems.”3 Lady Macbeth’s relationship with her husband initially does appear to threaten the traditional “gender system” as she is the dominant one, a role generally occupied by the male. This can be seen early on in the play when Lady Macbeth plots the murder of Duncan and employs Macbeth to commit the crime. 

While Macbeth’s lines outnumber Lady Macbeth’s across the play in its entirety, this dynamic is reversed in Act I Scene vii. Macbeth comes to his wife to declare that their murder plot is off the table, however her influence over him can be tracked across the course of the short scene. The conversation becomes notably one-sided, with Macbeth speaking only 21 lines, while Lady Macbeth has 43. However he seems initially resolute when he arrives. He states plainly that “we will proceed no further in this business” (I.vii.31), clearly displaying the traditional characterisation of the male character as the dominant one by making a firm decision that he apparently expects his wife to follow. However, Lady Macbeth manipulates him by questioning his masculinity (“when you durst do it, then you were a man” (I.vii.49)), and even makes the striking claim that she would go as far as to kill her own infant child if she had so promised. Macbeth begins to acknowledge that the plan is still in place, despite claiming moments ago that it would go no further, when he voices his doubts and asks: “If we should fail?” (I.vii.59). One final push from Lady Macbeth and it becomes clear that she has manipulated her husband to do her bidding when he starts to plan the murder. 

“Will it not be received,
When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two 
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, 
That they have done't?” (I.vii.75-78)

This kind of control and manipulation makes a strong case for Lady Macbeth as the dominant character in the play. Like Levin says, she threatens “hegemonic sex/gender systems” and this is particularly clear in this scene. Not only does Lady Macbeth have double the lines of her husband, she also emasculates him and rejects her maternal instincts in an attempt to align herself with the masculine and him with the feminine, thus putting herself in a position of power traditionally denied to the woman. Macbeth even notes this himself:

“Bring forth men-children only;	 
 For thy undaunted mettle should compose	 
 Nothing but males.” (I.vii.73-75)

He states that her fearless spirit is so masculine in nature that she could only possibly produce male children, a curious juxtaposition of masculinity and maternity. These blurred gender lines are a common theme throughout the play. Lady Macbeth further embodies this nonconformist/witch figure as she deliberately desexualises herself in the hopes of destroying any maternal instinct or perceived feminine weakness:

Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
Of direst cruelty! (I.v.47-50)

This same idea of androgyny can be seen in the witches in this very play, lending further credence to the comparison between Lady Macbeth and a witch. As Macbeth says:

You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so. (1.3.46-48)

Despite being referred to several times as “sisters”, Macbeth makes it clear that their gender is not obvious. How to classify the witches is complex question with many valid answers, but regardless, their androgyny creates a clear comparison between them and the “unsexed” Lady Macbeth.

Dusinberre states that in “seeking to be more than a woman [Lady Macbeth] becomes less than one […] as unsexed as the witches themselves.”4 To an extent, this could be seen as a position of power, as Lady Macbeth has stepped outside of her gender role and any restrictions it may have held for her. This is illustrated clearly in Act I Scene vii, as discussed above, as Lady Macbeth gains more power over her husband as she portrays a more masculine strength and questions her husband’s manhood. However, Levin argues that as the play progresses “Lady Macbeth enacts the transformation of the witch into the hysteric.”5 She turns from being an androgynous and powerful character to an hysterical somnambulist. The word “hysteric” itself, although never used in Macbeth, highlights her return to femininity, as the word itself has its etymology in the Greek “husterikos” – meaning “of the womb”.

The transition of Lady Macbeth’s character throughout the play can also be seen in her position in society. Following the murder of Duncan, the subversion of the so-called “hegemonic sex/gender systems” returns to normal as Lady Macbeth is excluded from social situations, and returns to what may be considered the more traditional role of dutiful and obedient wife. Klein notes that “as soon as Duncan’s murder is a public fact, Lady Macbeth begins to lose her place in society and her position at home. She does so because there is no room for her in the exclusively male world of treason and revenge.”6 This would seem to be a running theme across Shakespeare’s tragedies, with Portia and Calpurnia similarly being deemed “[harmless] in the political world”.7 After the murder, Macbeth no longer relies on his wife: “After Macbeth becomes king, he, the man, so fully commands Lady Macbeth that he allows her no share in his new business. No longer his accomplice, she loses her role as housekeeper.”8 Thus, the subverted gender roles appear to have returned to normal, with Macbeth no longer confiding in his wife, much like Brutus in Julius Caesar. She is no longer the masculine, dominant half of the couple, in fact she is almost no longer part of the couple at all, with Macbeth aligning himself with the witches instead of her, as Klein notes: “Macbeth’s union with the witches symbolises the culmination of Lady Macbeth’s loss of womanly social roles as well as her loss of home and family.”9 Thus, she hasn’t only lost her purpose as Macbeth’s accomplice and returned to her traditional role, but she also seems to have lost her place as Macbeth’s wife altogether. 

So it would appear that “Lady Macbeth is given the freedom to act only so far, then she is pulled back into line […] through her madness and her subsequent death”10  which makes a very interesting comment on the strength of Shakespeare's women. The repercussions of Lady Macbeth’s actions drive her insane, despite her being so sure of herself and her motives at the start of the play, and yet, even though Macbeth had significant doubts about the murder, and although he was the one to physically commit the deed, he remains (relatively) sane, while his wife descends into madness. This gender disparity seems to suggest an inherent weakness in the female character, as if they cannot support masculine roles for any length of time without committing suicide. 

Over the course of these posts, it has been seen that Shakespeare’s women can be complex, strong-willed, and paramount to the plots of their respective plays, however whether or not they are the “dominant” characters is still in question. Timon of Athens makes a strong case that the women in the tragedies are used simply for their biological capabilities, but the women in Julius Caesar and Macbeth present a more complex case study.

Both Portia and Lady Macbeth are extraordinary in their subversion of gender roles as they challenge the societal expectations that surround them as women and wives. They both display masculine traits in order to be taken more seriously in their male-dominated worlds, and Lady Macbeth in particular has relative success with this tactic. However, given their fates, Shakespeare seems to be suggesting that any androgynous or masculine strength exhibited by female characters will eventually lead to their downfall; as if his female characters are punished for stepping outside of their expected roles. 

The question of Shakespeare as a feminist remains as it was: unanswerable. However, the changing ideologies of the Renaissance have almost certainly had an impact on these tragic women, as their traditional roles are subverted and questioned. Women can be dominant, they can reject motherhood, and even their womanhood, and while the eventual fates of women like Lady Macbeth and Portia are not favourable, there is no denying that many of Shakespeare’s women shirk tradition and give an insight into the transitions and ever-changing ideologies that have led to society as we know it today: not quite equal yet, but at least we don’t have to stab ourselves in the leg anymore.
